Hi guys,

First off thank you for all your hard work on the Magpi magazine. You guys are doing a fantastic job!

I have been working my way through some of the tutorials and it occurred to me that while each tutorial states which part it is (Part 1, Part 2 etc..) there is no way to know how far along the whole thing you are. I love the little banner you put in to indicate the difficulty level of each tutorial(Easy, Advanced, etc) and was wondering if you would consider doing something similar for the parts. A banner that states Part 1 of 3 or some such would help to keep track of how far along you are with the tutorial. Maybe next to the difficulty banner?

Anyway, that's my 2 cents worth. 

Thanks again for this brilliant resource.
Roeland Schumacher



I'm amazed at the work you have done over the past 18 issues and now with the back catalogue I thought there were enough Scratch projects to make a self contained guide.

So, I pulled all the pages from the existing issues and packaged them into a new PDF.

I've put it on Google Drive at the following link:
https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B23BvTk93HRYV0JEZE5yeWo5MEE/edit?usp=sharing

Again, thank you for the magazine.
Albert



I bought a Raspberry Pi a while ago, and other things got in the way of my plan for playing with it.  Now that winter is on the way and the evenings are drawing in, I have time to devote to returning to playing with my Raspberry Pi.  I have downloaded and read through some of the issues of your magazine, and really like the format and contents.

I enjoy the regular columns and how they form a sequence from basic tasks to more challenging ones in each discipline (Scratch, Python, C, hardware hacking, etc.).  What would be really useful would be a page with a list of links to each article in a regular column in order, so that people in my position can work their way through the exercises and articles in order.  I imagine this would be useful to those people who have started with something easier (e.g. Scratch) and decide, having gained competence there, to “graduate” onto a more challenging discipline.

Keep up the good work,
Robin


Great magazine, especially at the price!

As an electronics engineer with a bit of a background in programming,  I was amazed when I saw the Raspberry Pi launched at such a low price.

I am now spending all my spare time (which isn't that much) building bits and coding the Raspberry Pi.  Takes me back to the 80's, ZX80, Acorn Electron etc.

Your magazine is providing loads of info. for me, as well as ideas and enthusiasm.  
Sincere Thanks,
Nigel


Just wanted to inform you that the article (Pi Vision, Issue 18) looked great!

My kids are proud.

Many greetings,
B.J. Rao
